HSC Physics experiments by module
HSC Physics experiments by module


To any G24 students reading from the shared drive: All experiments are subjectively rated 1-3 stars by myself based on their relevance/importance to hsc studies. That being said, all experiments here, even the “1 star” ones are relevant to a significant extent, so probably read over any experiments you aren’t familiar with at least once (some of them i wouldn't have thought to be relevant until i saw them in trial exam questions).


A brief note on the completion of the document thus far:


At the moment here are the experiments on my “to do list” that I haven’t done yet:
* Photoelectric effect analysis (kinda done in notes elsewhere)
* Could perchance do more detail on the general nature of cathode rays
* Chadwick (I actually gotta get this one done)
* De Broglie matter waves (D-G + GP T)
* Quarks (SLAC + AB)
* Bubble chambers for positron
* Neutrino
* Hubble’s observations (method with Cepheid variables)
Everything else in HSC physics SHOULD BE here. Lmk if not.


A brief note on the speed of light:


As for the “speed of light experiments”, I include a fair few. I would recommend picking at least ONE historical experiment and at least ONE contemporary method to learn completely (making sure you know the context and method and can derive the equations they used to calculate the speed of light). If you aren’t sure which “one to pick”, for the historical one,I recommend Fizeau’s measurement (it’s the easiest) and for contemporary I personally like Froome/Evansen’s interferometry method as it is also quite simple and has simple equations and ideas associated with it. You should be at least familiar with all the methods on this document though.


 A brief note on the mod 5 and 6 experiments:


While I have seen all of these come up in trial papers/internal assessments before, I think it’s unlikely that we would see them in the HSC. If you haven’t looked at experiments since the trials, I recommend studying only the three star mod 5/6 experiments (at the time of writing I have listed only one such experiment), and otherwise focusing on mod 7/8.


Also, for those reading in later years, this was written by my HSC student self, so I can’t guarantee that everything is 100% accurate.


Finally, while all necessary EXPERIMENTS should be here, that does not mean that all necessary EVIDENCE for scientific theories in the HSC is here. See module specific notes for such information in more detail. 




Contents:
Module 5 - Important history
⭐Galileo’s “Leaning Tower of Pisa” thought/real experiment (1589-1592)
⭐⭐⭐Galileo’s demonstration of the principles of projectile motion (reportedly early 1600-1610)
⭐⭐Kepler’s third law from empirical data (1618)
⭐⭐Newton’s cannon on a mountain thought experiment (1687)
⭐Henry Cavendish’s experiment to find “G” from Newton’s law of universal gravitation (1798)
Module 6 - What we know today as Maxwell’s 3rd and 4th equations
⭐⭐Hans Oersted’s effect of a current on a nearby compass (1820)
⭐⭐Michael Faraday showing electric fields can be induced by changing magnetic fields (1831)
Module 7 - Light in general
⭐⭐Evidence of Huygen’s theory: Poisson’s bright spot
⭐⭐⭐Young’s double slit experiment (1801)
⭐Beeckman and Galileo’s “lanterns on hills” attempt to measure the speed of light (1629)
⭐⭐Ole Rømer’s “Io eclipse” evidence of a finite speed of light (1676) (220,000 km/s)
⭐⭐ James Bradley’s “stellar aberration” measurement of the speed of light (1728) (301,000 km/s)
⭐⭐⭐Hippolyte Fizeau’s “cogwheel” measurement of the speed of light (1849) (315,000 km/s)
⭐⭐Jean/Léon Foucault’s “rotating mirror” measurement of the speed of light (1862) (298,000 km/s)
⭐⭐⭐Heinrich Hertz’s verification of Maxwell’s EM (radio) waves (1887)
⭐⭐Rosa and Dorsey’s “vacuum constants” calculation of the speed of light (1907) (299,710 km/s)
⭐⭐Louis Essen’s “cavity resonance” measurement of the speed of light (1950) (299,792.5 km/s)
⭐⭐Froome / Evansen et al ‘s “interferometry” measurement of the speed of light (1958/72) (299,792.456 km/s)
⭐⭐Photoelectric effect analysis
Module 7 - Special relativity
⭐⭐Galileo’s principle of relativity “ship” thought experiment (1632)
⭐⭐⭐Evidence for Einstein's postulates: The Michelson-Morley “ether” experiment (1887)
⭐⭐The mirror in a train thought experiment (1905)
⭐Derivation of time dilation from Einstein's postulates (photon clock) (1905)
⭐Derivation of length contraction from Einstein's postulates (muon hypothetical) (1905)
⭐Evidence for relativity of simultaneity: The lights in a box thought experiment
⭐⭐⭐Evidence for time dilation and length contraction: High altitude muons (Frisch-Smith experiment) (1962)
⭐⭐⭐Evidence for time dilation: Hafele-Keating Experiment (1971)
Module 8 - Atomic and subatomic
⭐Discovery of the electron: Behaviour of cathode rays (in general)
⭐⭐Discovery of the electron:  The British against German examination of cathode rays (1897)
⭐⭐⭐Discovery of the electron: J.J. Thomson’s calculation of the charge to mass ratio of cathode rays (1897)
⭐⭐⭐The charge of an electron: Robert Millikan’s “oil drop” experiment (1909)
⭐⭐⭐Discovery of the nucleus: Geiger-Marsden “gold foil” experiment (1909)
⭐⭐⭐Evidence for De Broglie matter waves: Davisson-Germer experiment (1927) (To do before HSC)
⭐Evidence for De Broglie matter waves: G. P. Thomson’s experiment (1927) (Should do briefly incase of a wave particle duality high marker)
⭐⭐Wilson cloud chambers
⭐⭐⭐James Chadwick’s discovery of the neutron (1932)
⭐⭐Evidence that protons and neutrons are not fundamental: Alvarez and Bloch (1940)
⭐⭐⭐Evidence that protons and neutrons are not fundamental: SLAC deep inelastic scattering (1968)
⭐Standard model prediction of the W and Z bosons, prediction of the Higgs boson
⭐⭐Bubble chambers and the positron
⭐⭐Discovery of the neutrino (Cowan-Reines) (1956)
Module 8 - The universe
⭐⭐⭐Hubble’s observations (to do before HSC, method)




Module 5 - Important history


⭐Galileo’s “Leaning Tower of Pisa” thought/real experiment (1589-1592)


Important note: 


Don’t spend too much time reading through this one, it’s got a lot of information compared to how (not very) important it is. 


TLDR Summary: Galileo wrote about (and may or may not have actually) dropped two balls of different weights from the leaning tower of Pisa and observed that they took the same amount of time to land. This is important for the HSC because it is the first evidence for a constant uniform acceleration due to gravity (independent of mass), which is one of the principles of ballistic projectile motion. This was later explained by Newton’s law of universal gravitation alongside Newton’s second law of motion, F=ma.


Context:


The prevailing belief in the late 16th century regarding the acceleration of falling objects was informed by the outdated teachings of the famous Philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BC), who asserted that “the rate that objects fall is proportional to their weight” (yes from the resources I’ve looked at it appears this truly was the belief, and it just wasn’t questioned so much as we see things like feathers fall slower than sticks because of the effects of air resistance). Before the 1564 birth of Galileo, Italians had already claimed to have proven this wrong, but there was still some controversy, some questioning why two balls, one made of iron and one made of wood, would fall at the same speed, likely due to their common human intuition. Galileo countered with the thought experiment, written in his book “On motion”, where he argued that if we assume that heavier objects do indeed fall faster than lighter ones, then upon dropping two objects of different weights, attached by a loose string, then the spring should soon pull taut as distance between the two objects increases due to the disparity in speed, which would create a system heavier than the two objects alone, which should therefore fall faster. He argued that this contradiction leads us to conclude that the assumption is false, prompting Galileo to conduct his famous experiment to prove once and for all  that the rate that objects fall is independent of their mass.


IMPORTANT NOTE: It was never confirmed by Galileo himself in his writings that this experiment ACTUALLY OCCURRED, it was only written about decades later by one of his students, Viviani in his book “Vita di Galileo” (or Life of Galileo), and hence, while I am including this because it is such an iconic experiment in terms of physics, whether it “really happened” in terms of history is debated. Nonetheless it is still a valid experiment. Below is a relevant section from an academic writing on Viviani’s work (I couldn’t find a copy of the original work in English so I’m using secondary sources):
  

So from here on I will be treating the experiment as if it really happened, but keep in mind that isn’t guaranteed to have been the case. In any scenario where an exam question requires justification of the Galilean principles of projectile motion I would prefer using the next experiment whenever possible, this one I’d only use if I had to use the demonstration of a uniform vertical acceleration for all objects in my argument.


Aim: 
To demonstrate that the time of a free-falling object’s descent from a particular height is independent of the weight of that object, thus showing that (as time is independent), the rate that an object falls is also independent. 
Hypothesis:
The two objects of unequal weights will take the same amount of time to fall from the same height.
Experimental setup:
  Rough method:
Galileo is said to have dropped “unequal weights of the same material” from the same height on the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and measured and compared the time taken for the two objects to reach the ground. Exactly how he measured the time is not well documented as far as my research went, but some plausible options could include visually/audibly witnessing the two objects collide with the ground, or using a secondary observer at the base of the tower. 
Results:


Galileo found that the time taken for the unequal weights of the same material to fall from the same height was (more or less) the same.
Discussion:


This experiment had some notable concerns. First, something that may seem concerning, but really ends up not being too bad is that Galileo, much like all of HSC physics, did not account for air resistance. Galileo specified that the two objects were of the same material, so therefore the heavier one would have to have a larger volume, and presumably surface area, and experience more air resistance. Although as far as I can find, there is not any definitive record of the specific objects drop, it seems likely that the selected objects were spherical wooden balls or lead cannonballs, which would have minimised the effects of air resistance (as spherical objects minimise surface area and the fact that they are heavier would result in the force of air resistance being a lesser fraction of the gravitational force acting on the ball, hence having a smaller effect on the net acceleration). Furthermore, this wouldn’t really matter anyway as while the heavier ball would experience more air resistance, its force of gravitational attraction would also be larger, so air resistance would likely contribute to lowering the acceleration of the two balls similarly, and hence we can say this is not a concern. Secondly, the method of timing may have easily led to an incorrect observation due to the limitations of visually observing the balls landing due to parallax error and audible clarity when listening to just the sounds they make (if we assume Galileo did the experiment alone, which is not confirmed to be true or false).
Conclusion:
The experiment demonstrated that the time taken for two objects to fall the same height in a gravitational field is independent of the mass of those objects (assuming negligible air resistance). From this, it follows that the acceleration due to gravity is the same for all objects.


Impact:
This experiment was crucial for laying the groundwork for projectile motion (which assumes a constant, uniform vertical acceleration due to gravity for all masses) and for Newton’s law of universal gravitation.


⭐⭐⭐Galileo’s demonstration of the principles of projectile motion (reportedly early 1600-1610)


Aim:


To demonstrate that the vertical and horizontal components of free motion in a gravitational field are independent by showing that horizontal velocity does not affect the time taken to fall a given height.


Method:


A ball is rolled off a plane at varying velocities (velocity is the independent variable). Since we cannot directly measure the velocity, we time the how long it takes the ball to roll a specific distance and use the formula  to attain our horizontal velocity. We then plot the range of the projectile (horizontally measured from the point of free fall to the point of contact with the ground) against the initial horizontal velocity of the ball. Controlled variables include (most importantly) the height of the surface that we roll the ball off. To ensure maximum accuracy of our measurement of initial velocity, the surface from which we roll the ball off should be reasonably long, but not too long. The surface (depicted as a black box in the desmos diagram) should not be too short, as that would mean any uncertainty in the time due to reaction time with the stopwatch would result in a larger percentage error. The box should not be too long as friction between the ball and the box could be significant enough such that the velocity that the ball leaves the box at is significantly slower than the average, and hence velocity would be overestimated, which may contribute to incorrect horizontal velocities being plotted. Most importantly, whatever distance the ball rolls, it should also be controlled.


  

https://www.desmos.com/calculator/0gxnk0raml <- you can run a little animation here


Results, conclusion and impact:


After plotting range vs initial velocity, we should attain an approximately linear relationship in the form of . Recall that . In our equation, range is  and  is , so thus the gradient  is the time taken for the descent. The fact that this gradient is a constant shows that no matter the horizontal velocity, the ball takes the same time to fall (as  represents ). Since the time to fall is related only to the vertical components of velocity/acceleration, we can conclude that the vertical components of motion are not influenced by horizontal conditions.


We can derive that the time taken is:


Where  is the height that the ball was rolled from and  is the acceleration due to gravity ()


This idea is potentially useful, as I could see a HSC question providing us with a graph of range vs x velocity when rolling a ball off some slope, and asking us to find the height of the ledge based on the gradient for instance.


It is important to consider that in real life, the gradient may not be constant, but could decrease as  increases. This is because larger speeds will result in greater effects of air resistance (which we do not account for in the HSC), which would hinder the range, making the relationship non-linear.


Since this experiment showed that the  and  components are independent, it allows us to break up any projectile motion scenario into an  component and a  component and operate on those components individually, ultimately having the impact of allowing us to solve complex problems involving ballistic motion in a uniform gravitational field much more easily.


⭐⭐Kepler’s third law from empirical data (1618)


Context:


Johannes Kepler was a strong proponent of the heliocentric model, which rivalled the geocentric model in his time period. Scientific models are all about making accurate predictions that reflect experimental data, and Copernicus’s heliocentric model, which involved circular orbits, could not always accurately predict the motion of the planets. This led Kepler to form his three laws of planetary motion to refine this heliocentric model. 


Aim: 
To attain a quantitative relationship between the (average) radius of a planet from the sun and its orbital period, which would provide strong evidence for the heliocentric model whilst improving its ability to make predictions.


Hypothesis:


Unlike the geocentric model where stellar bodies orbit around the earth and we would not expect any correlation between radius from the sun, Kepler hypothesised that in a heliocentric model (which was the scientific consensus at the time despite overall societal controversy) there should be some mathematical relationship between the two variables.
Results:


Attained from observations of Tycho Brahe:


Planet
	Mean distance
to sun (AU)
	Period
(days)
	
(10-6 AU3/day2)
	Mercury
	0.389
	87.77
	7.64
	Venus
	0.724
	224.70
	7.52
	Earth
	1
	365.25
	7.50
	Mars
	1.524
	686.95
	7.50
	Jupiter
	5.20
	4332.62
	7.49
	Saturn
	9.510
	10759.2
	7.43
	

“I first believed I was dreaming... But it is absolutely certain and exact that the ratio which exists between the period times of any two planets is precisely the ratio of the 3/2th power of the mean distance.”
— translated from “Harmonies of the World” by Johannes Kepler (1619)


Kepler found that , which can also be expressed as .


This is clear when the two variables are plotted graphically: https://www.desmos.com/calculator/etsrsahitm 

Discussion:


Any potential minor discrepancies between measured values and the predictions of this relationship can be accounted for by imperfect measuring devices at the time and non-perfect elliptical orbits (due to the planet’s gravitational influence on each other).


Conclusion:


The third power of (mean) radius is directly proportional to the second power of orbital period.


Impact:


Advanced astronomy, improved the heliocentric model, and laid the foundation for the principles that we still use today that allow for specific uses of satellites and such.


⭐⭐Newton’s cannon on a mountain thought experiment (1687)


Aim and context: 


This thought experiment was published in Newton’s 1687 book, “Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica” (commonly known as “the Principia”), a work which is known for proposing Newton’s laws of universal gravitation. Newton sought to show that the falling of objects here on earth and the elliptical/circular orbits of celestial bodies were both caused and governed by one universal gravitational force, so he presents the following thought experiment early in his book.


The experiment:


Newton, in his publication, states:


 “That by means of centripetal forces, the Planets may be retained in certain orbits, we may easily understand, if we consider the motions of projectiles. For a stone projected is by the pressure of its own weight forced out of the rectilinear path, which by the projection alone should have it pursued, and made to describe a curve line in the air; and though that crooked way is last brought down to the ground. And the greater the velocity with which it is projected, the farther it goes before it falls to the Earth. We may therefore suppose the velocity to be so increased, that it would describe an arc of 1, 2, 5, 10, 100, 1000 miles before it arrived at earth, till at last exceeding the limits of the Earth, it should pass by without touching it.”


I included Newton’s exact words (with minor translation from his older english -> modern english) just because his true explanation is so intuitive even for someone unfamiliar with physics completely, and reading the original publication really helps with your appreciation of the experiment and its historical significance in the development of physical theory.


  

Conclusion and significance:


Newton was able to conclude that the orbital motion of celestial bodies could be explained by the same force that causes objects to fall to the ground. This was particularly significant as it was the first step towards “uniting the laws of the earth with the laws of the heavens”, and would allow for the quantitative and physically derived explanation of ideas such as Kepler’s third law though Newton’s universal law of gravitation and classical mechanics.


⭐Henry Cavendish’s experiment to find “G” from Newton’s law of universal gravitation (1798)


Context:


Before we knew the value of “G”, we were missing two variables in Newton’s law of universal gravitation, G and M (of the Earth, as we had already found ways to measure the Earth’s radius to a reasonable accuracy). Hence, finding “G” by other means would allow us to infer the mass of the Earth and other celestial bodies by studying how their gravitational fields influence other objects. Hence, Henry Cavendish set out to find this fundamental constant.


Experimental setup


  

(A contemporary illustration of the experimental idea)


The basic principle was to use an apparatus known as a torsion balance. A torsion balance is essentially just something with a restoring force that increases in magnitude as you get progressively further away from its “rest” configuration. Cavendish used a type of wire for this, which, when displaced  degrees from its “rest” state, will exert a torque in the opposite direction of its angular displacement given by:





Where  is some constant of proportionality dependent on the wire, which can be calculated for the specific wire prior to the experiment (Cavendish used a method involving measuring the natural resonant oscillation period of the torsion balance, way out of the syllabus).  is therefore a known variable, and  is a measured quantity, which was determined by using the reflection of light from a mirror as shown above.


The point where the system stabilises will be the point of zero net torque, ie:





Where  is the torque due to the gravitational attraction between both pairs of the two metal spheres, which can be expressed as:



 Can be approximated as 90, . Hence:



Assuming the system is symmetric of course (as in the “big masses” on either side are equal and the “small masses” on either side are equal, if not, you would have to make four separate variables for the masses and  would become ), also for clarification  is the radius from the pivot and  is the distance between the centres of the spheres. Equating:






Since we know , ,  and , and we can measure  and  (using the mirror, light source, and scale seen in the above illustration), we can calculate  based on an experimental setup resembling this.


Results and impact:


Cavendish originally used his results to calculate the density of the Earth, but converting his experimental data to the form we need for  in SI units yields his experimental result of:





Which differs only approximately 1% from our accepted value of  that we use in the HSC.


As mentioned earlier, Cavendish used the results to calculate the density of the Earth, which provided significant additional evidence for a planetary core made of metal, as Cavendish’s density result was 80% the density of liquid Iron, and 80% higher than the density of the Earth’s outer crust. (That bit is not at all important for our HSC studies, just a fun fact).


Module 6 - What we know today as Maxwell’s 3rd and 4th equations


⭐⭐Hans Oersted’s effect of a current on a nearby compass (1820)


Context:


Prior to this experiment there had been no links made between electricity and magnetism with significant experimental evidence backing them.


Aim: 
To attain experimental evidence for a link between the two “separate forces” of electricity and magnetism by demonstrating that an electric current can influence a nearby magnetic compass needle.
Hypothesis:
At the time, the observation was a surprise, but our hypothesis today would be that due to Ampere’s law, the current will induce a radial magnetic field, and hence a compass needle placed within a reasonable distance from the wire will experience a force, and visually reorient itself.


Experimental setup:


In article IV of “Annals of Philosophy: Or, Magazine of Chemistry, Mineralogy ..., Volume 16” published in 1820, Oersted describes his setup as follows:


The opposite ends of the galvanic battery were joined by a metallic wire (which he called the “uniting conductor”). Let the straight part of this wire be placed horizontally above a magnetic needle, properly suspended and parallel to it.


Here is a diagram of the initial conditions that I have created to be as Hans describes:
  



Rough method:


Current was allowed to flow through the conductor depicted above and any deflection of the compass needle was noted. This was repeated multiple times with different independent variables to ascertain the effects of the following on the deflection experienced by the needle: 
* Changing distance.
* Changing “power of the battery” i.e. current.
* Placing different mediums between the needle and the conductor.


Results:


  

Oersted made the following observations:
* “Things being in this state, (when a current is allowed to flow through the conductor), the needle will be moved and the end of it next to the negative side of the battery will go westward” [Shows that the nearby electric current is able to influence a magnetic dipole]
* “Even glass, metal and wood, interposed at once (between the needle and the wire) do not destroy, and indeed scarcely diminish the effect” [Shows that this influence can permeate through different mediums]
* “If the uniting wire be placed in a horizontal plane UNDER the needle, rather than above, the effects are the same, only in the opposite direction” [First hint that the wire produced a radial magnetic field]
* The magnitude of the effect is (approximately) inversely proportional to the distance and proportional to the strength of the battery (current in the wire) [The magnitude of the effect is ∝ I and ∝ 1/r, which is essentially an empirical version of what we now know as Ampere’s law ]


Impact:


This experiment provided the first ever evidence for a link between the two concepts of electricity and magnetism. The findings of this experiment would later be formalised as Ampere’s law, which is a part of Maxwell’s fourth equation. The discovery of the production of a magnetic field by a wire is what allows us to have many devices we rely on today, such as electromagnets, which are necessary for transformers and universal motors, and it also paved the way for further links by Faraday, Lenz and Maxwell, that formed the concept of electromagnetism which progressed our technology and our theory of light drastically.


Just as a historical note, incredibly, Oersted in this paper is already speculating that light and heat may consist of the “conflict of electricities”, aka the link between electricity and magnetism, and he somehow speculates (correctly, although this was all philosophical) that this could contribute describing the polarisation of light, which Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave model for “light and heat” decades later did successfully do. Also don’t mind that his name is stated as “John” there, back then there was a common practice of anglicising foreign names. The name "Hans" is a variation of "Johannes," which is related to "John" in English, and hence Oersted appears to have gone by that name in English publications.
   


⭐⭐Michael Faraday showing electric fields can be induced by changing magnetic fields (1831)


Context:


Ever since Oersted’s discovery of an electric current’s ability to influence magnets, which was later formalised by Ampere as Ampere’s law (which describes the production of a radial magnetic field by a current carrying conductor), it had been suspected that similarly, magnetic fields could also, in particular circumstances, “induce” an electric current. The observations before Faraday’s experiment had only consisted of weak, temporary induced currents, which were noted by Faraday and motivated his experimental endeavours: “the power which electricity of tension possesses of causing an opposite electrical state in its vicinity has been expressed by the general term induction”. The source of this information is the first series of Michael Faraday’s 1839 publication “Experimental researches in electricity”.


Aim:


In the words of Faraday himself:


 “The hope of obtaining electricity from ordinary magnetism has stimulated me at various times to investigate experimentally the inductive effect of electric currents (electromagnets)”.


 Hence, Faraday set out to observe and determine the nature of the electrically inductive effects of both electromagnets (which he refers to as electric currents) and “ordinary magnetism”, aka what we may describe as a bar magnet.


Faraday’s first important experimental setup: Induction of electricity in a coil by electromagnets


Faraday describes this experimental setup as follows (experimental diagrams weren’t as common back then and it was more popular to include a detailed description of the setup in words):


 “203 feet of copper wire in one length was coiled round a large block of wood; another 203 feet in similar wire was interposed as a spiral between the turns of the first coil, and metallic contact everywhere prevented by twine. One of the helices was connected to a galvanometer, and the other to a (voltaic) battery.”


Below is a diagram I made of what this would actually look like, showing the two coils interposed over each other as Faraday described:
  



Faraday’s second important experimental setup: Induction of electricity in a coil by a bar magnet


Faraday describes this setup as follows:


 “About 26 feet of copper wire 1/20th of an inch in diameter were round around a cylinder of wood as a helix, the different spires of which were prevented from touching by a thin, interposed twine. This helix was covered with calico (an old plain fabric), and then a second wire applied in the same manner. In this way, 12 helices were superimposed, each containing an average length of wire of 27 feet, and all in the same direction. The first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth, and eleventh of these helices were connected at their extremities end to end, so as to form one helix; the other wires connected in a similar manner; and thus two principle helices were produced, closely interposed, having the same direction, not touching anywhere, and each containing 155 feet in length of wire.” (This description is from earlier in his publication). He then follows with: “A combination of helices like that already described were constructed upon a hollow cylinder of paste-board: There were 8 lengths of copper wire containing altogether 220 feet of wire… …All 8 of the elementary helices were coupled with the galvanometer by two copper wires, each 5 feet in length; and a soft iron cylinder was introduced into its axis”. “A cylindrical magnet, 3/4ths of an inch in diameter and 8 ½ inches of length was used. One end of the magnet was introduced into the axis of the helix, and then, the galvanometer needle being stationary, the magnet was suddenly thrust in”.


This is essentially just 12 coils of wire all linked together into one long series interposed on each other to create a very “turn dense” coil so to speak.
  

^ The apparatus as viewed from the front (you can see the 8 layers of solenoid which were used to maximise the “number of turns” and therefore the induced current, as they were all hooked up in series).
  

Results:


Faraday made the following observations and came to the following conclusions, all of which are quoted in his publication which after the HSC for those interested I highly recommend reading.
   * In the first experiment, there was only a current induced when the supplied voltage was connected or disconnected to the circuit. It was also noted that whatever the direction the induced current was when connecting, it was always the opposite when disconnecting. 
   * A wooden core was originally used due to its electric insulation abilities, however it was later found that (since the magnitude of galvanometer needle deflection was always so small) that a soft iron core could be used to maximise the effect.
   * The more coils of wire the greater the magnitude of induced current (I ∝ N).
   * The induced current in the secondary coil flows in the opposite direction of the current in the primary coil (The induced current behaves in a way that opposes the change in magnetic field by the electromagnet, later formalised as Lenz’s law)
   * While (a constant) voltaic current continued to pass through the helix, no induced current was observed (as there was no change in flux)
   * In the second experiment, the induced current depended on the motion of the bar magnet, not its position and there was no current induced when the bar magnet was stationary (further evidence for change in magnetic flux being the cause).
   * When the bar magnet was passed completely through the solenoid in one motion, the needle of the galvanometer was initially deflected one way, then the other.


Conclusions:


   * As the phenomena can be replicated with both electromagnets and bar magnets, and has a magnitude dependent on the magnetic permeability of the core material and also on the current in the primary (electromagnet) coil (because the B field produced by the coil was known to be proportional to the current by Ampere’s law), it must be an interaction with the magnetic field that causes this phenomenon.
   * As the induced current is only observed when the battery is connected/disconnected or when the bar magnet is in motion, and not when the system is in a steady state (no matter the magnetic field in the solenoid or position of the bar magnet), so this effect must be due to a change in the magnetic field.
   * The induced current in the secondary coil was in the opposite direction of the change in current in the primary coil (therefore inducing flux in the opposite direction to the change in flux) and the induced current in the second experiment behaved in a similar manner. Hence this induced current behaves in such a way that it opposes the change in magnetic flux that created it (Lenz’s law).


Module 7 - Light in general


⭐⭐Evidence of Huygen’s theory: Poisson’s bright spot


This experiment was devised originally to prove Newton’s corpuscular model of light. Poisson suggested that if Huygen’s wave model of light were correct, then edge diffraction around a small steel ball bearing should result in a region of positive interference of a “bright spot” when specific alignments are achieved. Poisson was a strong endorser of Newton’s corpuscular model of light, and expected that no bright spot would be observed. However, the true result did indeed show the production of such a “bright spot”, providing evidence for the diffraction and interference of light. As these are wave properties, this was strong early evidence for Huygen’s proposed wave model of light.
  



⭐⭐⭐Young’s double slit experiment (1801)


Context:


At the time, the two major competing theories of light were Newton’s corpuscular model and Huygens wave model, so naturally, scientists were looking for a way to resolve this conflict. The wave properties of diffraction and interference were known at the time, so Thomas Young knew that if he could experimentally demonstrate that light possessed such properties, it would provide strong evidence for the wave model of light. 


Aim:


To demonstrate that light exhibits the wave properties of diffraction and interference.


Hypothesis:


If Newton’s corpuscular model for light is correct, the two areas directly behind the slits should be illuminated on the screen. If Huygen’s wave model is correct, a diffraction pattern should be observed on the screen.


Experimental setup:
  



See mod 7 notes for the reason that the diffraction pattern arises as a result of diffraction and interference (essentially due to difference in distances that the waves from each slit travels to each point on the screen being dependent on the angle, some angles result in constructive and others destructive interference, making periodic bright and dark patches).


Results and conclusion:
  

The diffraction pattern was observed. Therefore Huygen’s wave model of light is superior to Newton’s when it comes to describing how light travels through space, as the observations of interference and diffraction cannot be explained by a particle model as such properties are exclusive to waves.


⭐Beeckman and Galileo’s “lanterns on hills” attempt to measure the speed of light (1629)


This experiment was unsuccessful at determining the speed of light, but is nice to know as it forms a part of the history of the subject. The idea was relatively simple. Two observers would be situated on two different hills, each with an initially covered lantern and a way to quickly uncover the lantern. The first observer would uncover his lantern, and the second observer would wait until this light reached him and uncover his. The first observer would record the time interval between uncovering his own lantern and receiving the light from observer two’s lantern, and this time interval would ideally be the time taken for light to travel twice the distance (there and back) between the two points, . However, this method is obviously unfit to provide an accurate estimate of the speed of light, as the actual time taken for the light itself to travel would be responsible for an insignificant fraction of the total observed delay, which would mainly be due to the secondary observer needing time to react to the incoming light and subsequently remove their cover, not to mention the lack of precision in any timekeeping equipment that they could have used to measure . So therefore, Galileo essentially concluded that if light’s travel was not in fact instantaneous, it must be very fast. In 1667, the “Accademia del Cimento” in Florence claimed to have performed a similar experiment with two lanterns approximately one mile away, and they reported that there was no delay. So it seems like at this point, no terrestrial methods are accurate enough to provide a good estimate of , because at this point in history, estimates range from “very fast” to “infinity”, if only there were some way we could use the scale of the solar system to better investigate the speed of light (foreshadowing to Romer 9 years later…).


⭐⭐Ole Rømer’s “Io eclipse” evidence of a finite speed of light (1676) (220,000 km/s)


This experiment is a bit more annoying to explain in exam conditions as it has a much more complex thought process and method than other historical examples. I got away in the trials with simplifying it a bunch, but to know which parts you can safely cut out you need to have a decent understanding of the experiment. I would recommend learning two “Historical” methods and one “Contemporary” method of measuring the speed of light to a solid level of detail, and I’d honestly say the better two historical ones are Fizeu and Foucault.


Context:  Before Romer’s (also spelt Rømer or Roemer) work, it was debated whether or not the speed of light was infinite. At the time, astronomers were puzzled by inconsistencies in the observed timings of events such as the eclipses of Jupiter's moon Io, as Io’s true period should be quite consistent as predicted by Kepler’s planetary laws of motion. Hence, Romer speculated that these inconsistencies may be due to differing times taken for the light to travel from Io to the Earth, and set out to attain data to show this.


Aim: To attain a non-infinite value for the speed of light (and hence deduce that it does not travel instantly) by utilising astronomical observations of the orbital period of Jupiter’s closest moon, Io.


Hypothesis: The deviations in Io’s orbital period are due to a finite speed of light.


Method:


Consider measuring the period of any local event, the period of the event can be given as follows:





Where  is the time of any occurrence and  is the time of the subsequent occurrence. 


However, the measured period will be dependant on the times we observe, which in turn depend on how long the information of each occurrence takes to reach us, and can be given as such:





The time that we observe any given event can be given as the time it truly occurred, which we will call “” plus whatever amount of time our observation is delayed by (let's call this variable “”).





Where  and  are the respective time delays between each event’s true occurrence and the time that we observe it. 


Note that if the two time delays are the same, there is of course no difference in the measured period compared to the actual period (although the measurement will occur later in time compared to the actual event).


Romer noticed that when the Earth was moving away from Jupiter, the measured period was longer than the average period (he had found this average period over many months of observations and assumed it to be the “real period”). He also noted that conversely, when the Earth was moving towards Jupiter, the measured period was shorter than the “real period”. This was not consistent with Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, which predicted that orbital periods were constant. While Kepler’s laws are indeed for an ideal scenario and in reality orbital periods are not always exactly constant, the fact that the measured orbital period varies with direct respect to Earth’s position in its orbit definitely suggests that Earth’s motion is the cause of such deviations, rather than the true period of Io itself changing. From Romer’s observations, we can gather the following (Let us consider the portion of Earth’s orbit where it is moving towards Jupiter):




Cancel  from both sides:




This means that, from Romer’s observations, when the Earth is nearing Jupiter (or when any observer is nearing any non-local event for that matter), the time taken for the information of the second instance to reach is less than the time taken for the first information to reach us. Since Romer knew that this information was delivered by light, this means that the speed of light cannot be infinite, as in such a case the delay in every case would be zero, which does not satisfy our observations, as in that case, , which is contrary to our observations. So we can conclude that light must travel at a finite speed. Furthermore, each delay must be equal to the time taken for light to travel from Jupiter to each corresponding location of measurement. As such:





Hence:

        


Let: 


 (where “” is our unknown speed of light and “” is the distance from the event)
Hence:





Hence we naturally arrive at a form of , so if we know , we can compute the speed of light. Now obviously this could be measured over one single period, but remember, this time delay over each individual period is quite small, and it’s annoying to calculate the change in distance between the Earth and Jupiter over one single eclipse cycle, so we can make the following assumption and attain a much better method.


Assumption: 
Consequences:
1: During our interval of measurement, Jupiter remains approximately stationary with respect to the sun (we assume this because Jupiter is much further out than the Earth, so thus by Kepler's third law it will have a much longer orbital period than the earth, ) (in reality over Romer’s 6 month interval Juipiter will move around approximately 1/24th of its orbital path).
2: Similarly, the direction from Earth to Jupiter will not significantly change (see the dark red lines).


We can use the following to construct the diagram below over a 6 month time period with multiple eclipses of Io  
From the diagram above, we can see that if we sum up the differences in measured orbital period and expected orbital period over a 6 month period where the earth is approaching Jupiter, we attain the approximate time it takes for light to travel the circumference of the Earth’s radius.


Hence we return to our formula:





Where  is approximately equal to the circumference of Earth’s orbit, and  is the cumulative time delay over the 6 month period (which is the sum of the differences of measured period and “true” period).


Romer’s data measured  at 22 minutes. While Romer himself did not actually provide a quantitative estimate, Dutch scientist Christian Huygens estimated the Earth’s diameter to be 12,750 km, and the diameter of the Earth’s orbit to be approximately 24,000 of such diameters. To keep things simple, as Huygens knew this was only a rough “ballpark” so to speak, it is said he rounded this speed down to 1000 diameters per minute, which through  yielded an estimate of 212,400 km/s (if he didn’t round it would have been 231,800 km/s). Later in 1694, Edmund Halley found that Romer’s 22 minutes should instead be 17 minutes, and thus Halley gave the speed of light as approximately 300,000 km/s.


Conclusion and significance

While Romer himself did not give a quantitative value for the speed of light, his evidence that the speed of light was not infinite would resolve the old debate of whether light travelled instantly, progressing the field and benefiting the accuracy of observational astronomy.


⭐⭐ James Bradley’s “stellar aberration” measurement of the speed of light (1728) (301,000 km/s)


Bradley actually discovered “stellar aberration” accidentally when he was attempting to gain even more evidence for the heliocentric model, which, while accepted by just about all major astronomers at the time, the church still denied. He aimed to do this by measuring the parallax angle, and predicted that the star he observed would appear to trace out a little circle in the sky, with a position related to the Earth’s position in its orbit as depicted below:
  

However, the his actual observations looked more like this:




  

This is due to a phenomenon known as stellar aberration, which turns out to be far more significant than the effects of parallax in most cases. As you can see from the diagram, this aberration results in the apparent position of the star shifting in the direction of the Earth’s velocity. James Bradley came up with an idea to explain this phenomenon, and in doing so was able to calculate the speed of light based on his derived relationships.


Consider light from a star reaching the Earth as illustrated below (from the sun’s frame of reference). We will let the x direction be along the plane of the Earth’s orbit and the y direction be normal to the plane of the Earth’s orbit. We will call the angle that the light from the star that hits the Earth makes with the direction of the Earth’s velocity “A”. Here, . We can also say that  and , which will be useful in a second.
  

Now consider the same scenario from the Earth’s frame of reference. From the Earth’s perspective, this light will appear to have a larger x component of velocity when compared to the sun’s or the “rest” frame. Now obviously due to special relativity, the light doesn’t just magically travel faster in this frame, but Bradley was in a time long before special relativity, and the model that he used (where he just added the velocities in a classical way) still provides very accurate predictions, so that’s what we’ll be going with. In this frame, .
  

 can also be expressed as:


 (divided numerator and denominator by )
Recall that  and , hence:

  



We want to find the displacement of the star due to the Earth’s motion. If we give this the symbol θ, then θ = A’ – A. Using the formula (which I will not be deriving, it’s pure maths just trust) for the difference between tangents we can show the following: 


 (Where ) 
Sub in our expressions for  and  from earlier.

Multiply both numerator and denominator by .

Factorise the top and expand the bottom:

Since  and :

Since the velocity  of the Earth is around 30 km/s, which is tiny compared to the speed of light, the term , and hence we can neglect it and simplify, reaching our final expression:
 (This is the important one)


By using this formula, Bradley was able to attain an estimate for the speed of light, as he could measure any angles he needed, and knew the speed of the Earth relative to the sun would range from 29.3 to 30.3 km/s. The value he attained was 301,000 km/s, which, for his time and method, is remarkably close to today’s accepted value.


⭐⭐⭐Hippolyte Fizeau’s “cogwheel” measurement of the speed of light (1849) (315,000 km/s)


For the record, I think this is usually the “best option” if you have a question where you can choose to discuss multiple methods, because this method is BY FAR the simplest compared to the other historical methods (unless you simplify the other historical methods a bunch).


Context:


This method is particularly significant because it was the first terrestrial method of measuring the speed of light. The idea behind Fizeu’s experiment was that since light travelled at a finite speed, if a mirror was situated several kilometres away from a source of light, there should be some delay between the light leaving the source and returning to be observed. Fizeau realised that he could periodically block and unblock the light source in such a way that by the time the “unblocked” light had reached the far away mirror and reflected back, the “blocker” was already in place again. 


Method:
  

Fizeau used a precisely machined cog wheel with 720 teeth, with spaces in between them equal to the width of the teeth themselves. The cog was spun at a specific speed, such that by the time the first bit of light that had gotten through the gap in the teeth of the cog wheel made it to the mirror and back, the next tooth had just spun around enough to block it. Here is a 2d animated visualisation I made on desmos: https://www.desmos.com/calculator/yept6tri9e. 


Fizeau was able to use knowledge of the distance between the cogwheel and the mirror (L=8630m), the number of teeth on the cogwheel (n=720), and the frequency of the cog wheel’s rotation that blocked all the returning light (f=12.6 Hz) to derive an expression for the speed of light:




 is the time taken for the cogwheel to spin the angular equivalent of half a tooth, as the light starts travelling towards the mirror when the gap has just “opened” and reaches the cogwheel again when that same gap is just “closing”. Hence:


,                 ,         








The value of  wasn't extremely accurate, but promising for such a new form of terrestrial method, which in the past had not been successful at all and had plenty of room for improvement (foreshadowing Leon Foucault).


⭐⭐Jean/Léon Foucault’s “rotating mirror” measurement of the speed of light (1862) (298,000 km/s)


This experiment is actually one of the most sophisticated of all the historical methods, and to fully describe requires a lot of complex description and an understanding of optics beyond the HSC syllabus. It is for this reason that I am also simplifying this experiment to the level that you would answer a HSC question to. Here is a decent video on how the method actually works to a good level of depth (that is definitely understandable for a HSC student, but not feasible to talk about in an exam): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okjE2FSnALA. I would personally NOT choose to talk about this experiment over Fizeau or even Romer or Bradley in a HSC question just because you have to dumb it down to such a large extent (the HSC markers should still accept it though, this is a personal preference).  


Context:


Hippolyte Fizeau a decade earlier had shown it to be possible to measure the speed of light without using stellar observations, however, his method was not particularly accurate. Hence, Leon Foucault sought to attain a more accurate terrestrial measurement for the speed of light.
  

Above is a brief look at an illustration of the actual setup (which we will ignore for the sake of the HSC).


Basic method (this is not what the actual setup looked like):
  

The simplified idea behind Foucault’s experiment was to send light to reflect off a rotating mirror onto a secondary stationary mirror directed at the rotating mirror. As the light takes time to travel to the stationary mirror and back, the rotating mirror would have rotated a little bit in that time interval, and hence, the beam will return at a different angle to the light from the source. Let’s call the angle that the mirror has rotated in this time interval , the distance between the rotating mirror and the stationary mirror , and the angular velocity of the mirror (which is known) .


Hence:



,         
It is important to note that  (the angle that the mirror has rotated) will be half the angular difference between the returning light and the original light source. This is due to the law of reflection, rotating the mirror  degrees will not only rotate plane of reflection  degrees, but also reduce the angle of incidence, and therefore the angle of reflection, by a further  degrees relative to the new orientation of the mirror. Finalising our equation:



Since Foucault knew , , and could measure  (although how exactly he measured  is simplified for the HSC), he was able to attain a highly accurate value of . This was by far the most successful of any experiment on such a small scale (not only was it on Earth, but unlike Fizeau, Foucault’s “distance” was only around 20m).


⭐⭐⭐Heinrich Hertz’s verification of Maxwell’s EM (radio) waves (1887)


Context:


Maxwell’s equations had suggested that oscillating electric charges (or an oscillating electric current) should generate waves of oscillating electric and magnetic fields that propagate through space at the speed of light. While we could observe electromagnetic radiation in the visible range, Maxwell’s equations had also predicted EM waves of other frequencies, that had not been directly observed before, and hence the discovery of such predicted waves would serve as a major stepping stone in validating Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave theory of light, so much so that another scientist, Hermann Helmholtz, set up a prize for any scientist that could verify Maxwell’s predictions. Hertz had recently built the first experimental spark-gap transmitters in 1887, which could produce radio frequency electromagnetic waves through the electrical discharge of a capacitor across a “spark gap” between two conductors. The actual radio wave is produced not by the spark itself, but the spark actually serves as a “kickstarter” to excite resonant radio frequency oscillating electric currents in the conductors of the attached circuit, via a mechanism of inductance that is not covered in the HSC.


Experimental setup:
  



A spark-gap transmitter is connected to an induction coil to supply the high voltage required to charge up the capacitor sufficiently. When discharged through an electric spark, resonant radio frequency oscillating electric currents in the conductors of the attached circuit are induced, which are predicted by Maxwell’s equations to create electromagnetic waves.


In order to detect these electromagnetic waves, Hertz utilised a receiver tuned to resonate at the same frequency as the wave source, such that the presence of the oscillating fields in the electromagnetic waves would create a spark across the gap (the mechanisms by which this occurs are beyond the scope of the syllabus). 


Experiment and results:
          
   * When holding the ring on the other side of the room, a spark in the generator would induce a smaller spark on the ring, indicating the presence of some sort of invisible electromagnetic wave.
  

   * When placing a sheet of metal in the path of the wave (the wave is simplified to be a straight line in the illustrations here), he was able to show that this wave could be reflected.
  

   * When imposing a pitch prism, such as illustrated above, he noticed that he would have to reposition his receiver to pick up the signal, and hence this wave can be refracted.
  

   * When imposing a reflective piece of metal specific distances away (specifically integer multiples of the wavelength/2), he was able to form a standing wave, which he could detect, as holding the detector at the nodes (such as 1) yielded no spark, but moving it to an antinode ( such as 2) resulted in a spark being induced. This illustrates the wave property of interference.
   * Most importantly, Hertz was able to measure the wavelength of this wave, as the distance between each node is equal to . Hertz also knew the resonant frequency of the detector, and therefore of the wave, so he could calculate the wave’s velocity using , and arrived at a value approximately equal to the speed of light predicted by Maxwell, .
  

      * Another important observation Hertz made was that imposing a glass window between the source and the detector resulted in a dimmer spark, whereas a quartz window had no effect. Unbenounced to Hertz, this was the first observable evidence of a phenomena similar to photoelectric effect, since the spark doesn’t just produce radio waves, but also a small amount of light in the uv-vis range, which was absorbed by the glass window (electrons are not released here but rather just excited), but not the Quartz window due to it’s different molecular structure that makes it transparent to UV.


Conclusion:


Hertz was able to detect and verify Maxwell’s prediction of a electromagnetic wave beyond the visible range that travel at his predicted velocity . The SI units for frequency () are named after Hertz () for his work in this field.


⭐⭐Rosa and Dorsey’s “vacuum constants” calculation of the speed of light (1907) (299,710 km/s)


This method of measuring the speed of light is one of the simplest, as it does not require actual observations of light itself. Instead, they used Maxwell’s derived relationship, . The vacuum magnetic permeability constant  had already been rigorously defined as equal to , so all they had to do was accurately measure the vacuum electric permittivity constant , which they did through an experiment on capacitors (which are outside the syllabus). Their calculations yielded a value of . The reason for the slight inaccuracy is primarily due to the inability to perfectly standardise the resistance of elements in the experiment that they used to find .


⭐⭐Louis Essen’s “cavity resonance” measurement of the speed of light (1950) (299,792.5 km/s)


Method:


Louis Essen believed that the analysis of standing waves had the potential to yield more accurate measurements for the speed of light. If you set up standing waves in a cavity, you can find out their wavelength by measuring the distance between two nodes (points of no amplitude) or anti-nodes (points of maximum amplitude), and multiplying that distance by two. If you also know the frequency of these waves, you can then use the relationship for waves  to calculate the velocity of the wave. 
  

In principle, this method is trivially simple, which is true to an extent, you can even do it using a microwave appliance and a sheet of chocolate (to observe the antinodes) in your own kitchen, but if you want to get a really accurate measurement of the speed of light it takes a more complicated setup. Essen used a copper cavity resonator hooked up to an adjustable microwave oscillator, and adjusted the frequency until standing waves were formed within the cavity. Knowing the dimensions of the box and the number of nodes he was then able to determine the wavelength, and subsequently calculate the speed of light to be .




⭐⭐Froome / Evansen et al ‘s “interferometry” measurement of the speed of light (1958/72) (299,792.456 km/s)


Note:


Froome’s and Evansen et al’s experiments were done at different times and by different people. The methods were extremely similar, and the only major difference as far as we are concerned was that Froome used radio waves and attained a highly accurate value of 299,792.5 km/s, whereas Evansen later used visible light and attained a more precise result of 299,792.456 km/s.


Method:
  

*The website (scienceready) that I stole this image from (I can’t be bothered to make all the images myself) made the silly mistake of  here, forgetting that while  is the required path length difference for destructive interference, the path length difference will actually be twice the distance the mirror is moved back (because the light travels there and back), don’t make that mistake in the HSC!


The experiment uses a device which resembles the illustrations above, which is known as a “Michelson Interferometer”, which, using a half-silvered mirror, splits a beam of light into two beams, which are reflected back to this central mirror and recombined. As a result, these two new beams will interfere with each other, either completely constructively interfering, completely destructively interfering, or somewhere in between. Complete constructive interference will of course occur when the two external mirrors are equal distances from the half-silvered mirror, as since the returning waves have travelled the same distance, they will naturally be in phase with each other, the peaks will align with the troughs, and a maximum amplitude will be observed. When the waves are half a wavelength out of phase, all peaks of any one wave will perfectly align with troughs of the other, and vice versa, and there will be complete destructive interference. It is relatively simple to observe when this is occurring, and hence we can take the original (constructive/equidistant) experimental setup and adjust the distance of one of the mirrors until we observe complete destructive interference. When we reach complete destructive interference we know that the net path difference between the two waves must be equal to , and therefore the distance we moved the mirror back must be . Since we know the distance, we can calculate the wavelength of the light, and similarly to the cavity resonance method, since we also know the frequency of the light we shone onto the mirror originally, we can use the relationship  to calculate the velocity of this wave. As such:



Where  is the difference in distance between the two mirrors from the central half-silvered mirror.





Froome in 1958 used radio waves to attain a value of . This value was limited by the wavelength of light used. Logically, you would think the longer the wavelength the more precise you can get (because any fixed limitations in your methods of measuring distance will become a smaller fraction of your measured value). However, here this is outweighed due to a different factor, being (to simplify it) that interferometric determination of wavelength becomes less precise with longer wavelengths because the interference fringes become wider and less sharply defined, and hence it is more difficult to exactly determine when full destructive interference is occurring. 


With the invention of the laser, Evansen et al were able to overcome this limitation by using visible light (shorter wavelength), and achieved a more precise value of , which is only  less than the value we use for the speed of light today.


⭐⭐Photoelectric effect analysis


To do 


Module 7 - Special relativity


⭐⭐Galileo’s principle of relativity “ship” thought experiment (1632)


The “experiment”:


Galileo's principle of relativity is an early thought experiment illustrating the idea that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial (non-accelerating) frames of reference. Galileo proposed a scenario involving a ship moving at a constant velocity. An observer on this ship would see everything behave as normal, dropped balls would appear to fall straight down (see “Galileo’s demonstration of the principles of projectile motion”), and the observer would feel no physical sensation of motion. In fact, if we position our observer in the hull of the ship, with the view of the outside world blocked, Galileo asserted that there should be no experiment that observer could do to ascertain whether he is in motion (relative to the rest of the world) or not (of course assuming no acceleration, which means perfectly still waters, etc).
  

Here is an excerpt from Galileo's 1632 book “Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems”, from the section dubbed “The Second Day”, which concerns primarily Galileo’s consideration of all the arguments made against the idea (which he was a proponent of) that the Earth moved (aka the heliocentric model). The book was in a dialogue fashion, where the character “Salviati” represents Galileo’s own thoughts, in discussion with others and it’s actually extremely interesting.


“Salv: Motion, in so far as it is and acts as motion, to that extent exists relatively to things that lack it; and among things which all share equally in any motion, it does not act, and is as if it did not exist. Thus the goods with which a ship is laden leaving Venice, pass by Corfu, by Crete, by Cyprus and go to Aleppo. Venice, Corfu, Crete, etc. stand still and do not move with the ship; but as to the sacks, boxes, and bundles with which the boat is laden and with respect to the ship itself, the motion from Venice to Syria is as nothing, and in no way alters their relation among themselves. This is so because it is common to all of them and all share equally in it. If, from the cargo in the ship, a sack were shifted from a chest one single inch, this alone would be more of a movement for it than the two-thousand-mile journey made by all of them together.”


“Salv: It is obvious, then, that motion which is common to many moving things is idle and inconsequential to the relation of these movables among themselves, nothing being changed among them, and that it is operative only in the relation that they have with other bodies lacking that motion, among which their location is changed.”


He then goes on to use this to counter various common arguments against the heliocentric model (which were supposed by his second of three hypothetical characters “Simplicio” who represented “Simplicity” and was characterised as a proponent to the existing aristotlian/catholic church views on the subject. There was also a third character “Sagredo” who represented a neutral, open minded layperson, “completing” the conversation. A link to the PDF I got this from is here: https://rauterberg.employee.id.tue.nl/lecturenotes/DDM110%20CAS/Galilei-1632%20Dialogue%20Concerning%20the%20Two%20Chief%20World%20Systems.pdf, obviously now is not the time to fully read it but I think it’s rather interesting even for someone not taking HSC physics and I highly recommend (the specific dialogue I used is taken from around page 116 in the book, page 72 on the PDF). And obviously I should note all this small historical stuff like the characters involved and such is not at all relevant to your HSC exam.


Conclusion and significance:


Galileo concluded through this thought experiment that motion must be understood as relative and that there is no "absolute" stationary frame of reference so to speak. As such, the laws of physics should be the same for all inertial observers, and there should be no possible experiment you can perform within an inertial reference frame to determine whether you are “stationary or not”, as such concepts are not absolute, but merely relative. This idea provided a strong argument for the heliocentric model in Galileo’s time, but the idea that the laws of physics will be the same for all inertial observers is also majorly responsible for Einstein's revelation of the postulates from which the theory of special relativity arises, as applying this idea to Maxwell’s equations (which provide a description of light based on the fundamental laws of electromagnetism) suggests that, if these laws of electromagnetism are invariant with respect to the observer’s frame of reference, the speed of light should also be invariant.


⭐⭐⭐Evidence for Einstein's postulates: The Michelson-Morley “ether” experiment (1887)


Context: 


The real “Michelson-Morely” experiment is actually different to this one, but from the sources I’ve looked at, it seems as if the HSC teaches an experiment performed only by Michelson in 1881 as the “Michelson-Morely” experiment, so we’ll go with that.        


Maxwell’s vacuum wave solutions to his recently established fundamental laws governing electric and magnetic fields predicted waves that required no medium to propagate. This sparked some controversy in the scientific community, as waves had of course been previously understood as requiring a medium of propagation. Since, if such a medium existed for light, we could certainly not detect it by any conventional means, it was dubbed the “luminiferous aether”, and this theory was predominant at the time of this experiment. 


Hence, in attempts to detect and measure the speed of this aether (the aim is said to be to measure the velocity of the Earth relative to the aether, not actually to verify it’s existence), Albert A. Michelson and Edward W. Morley developed the “aether wind hypothesis”. Consider the Earth’s motion, since the Earth is constantly moving through space, we are more than likely in a different reference frame to the so called “luminiferous aether” at any given point in time, and we would therefore expect that two beams of light travelling perpendicular to each other (at the same velocity relative to such an aether) would be observed as travelling at different speeds from our frame of reference (since we are presumably not stationary with reference to this aether). This is analogous to a boat travelling in a rapidly flowing river, in which case the river would be the “aether” and the boat “light”. In said scenario, the boat always sees itself travelling at the same velocity relative to the water medium, but an observer on the shore (which in this experiment represents us taking measurements on the Earth) would see a varying velocity of the boat depending on it’s orientation compared to the flow of the medium (aka the “aether wind”). 


Experimental setup:


The experimental setup involved a “Michelson interferometer”, similar to that which was later used in Froome’s and Evansen’s measurements of the speed of light. 
  
  
  

A beam of white light was split up into two beams travelling perpendicular to each other using a half-silver mirror. Both paths of the beam were set up to be the same distance. When the two beams were reunited, they were recombined at slightly different angles, creating a stable interference pattern with periodic light and dark fringes that could be observed on an interferogram. Michelson and Morely aimed to measure the velocity of the aether by observing the “fringe shift” in the interference pattern formed, as when the relative velocity of one of the beams relative to the other changed due to the Earth’s motion through the aether, we would expect a changing interference pattern, namely that the fringes would move side to side as the period of the waves shift relative to one another.


Results and conclusion:


Michelson and Morely repeated this experiment at multiple angles at multiple times of day but were not able to observe any significant, let alone the expected changes in the interference patterns, constituting a null result. It was speculated that this result could be explained by the Earth “dragging” the aether with it, creating no significant “wind”, or perhaps that this medium of propagation did not actually influence the speed of light (not much of a medium at that point if you ask me), but a generally important distinction to make it that this experiment DID NOT PROVE that the aether did not exist, but rather failed to measure it’s velocity / provide evidence for its existence. This result would later support scientists like Einstein in abolishing the concept of an “aether”.


⭐⭐The mirror in a train thought experiment (1905)


  

Einstein imagines an observer in a train moving very close to the speed of light . His question is, if a mirror is situated in front of an observer in the train, will the observer be able to see his own reflection? 


Newtonian relativity suggests not, as the light “leaving the observer” would be travelling at , a similar velocity to the observer and the mirror, and hence would essentially never “catch up” to the mirror. This conflicts the principles of relativity proposed by Galieo, that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames, as an observer inside the train would see the light travelling with a velocity . Since the fundamental laws of electromagnetism predict a speed of light of . This would suggest that the laws of electromagnetism would have to be different in this frame, contradicting this principle of relativity. In fact, the only “solution” to this problem that upholds the principle of relativity is Einstein's second postulate, that the speed of light will always be measured as exactly  by all inertial observers.


Thus, this experiment elucidates the paradoxes that can arise when Newtonian relativity is applied to situations with velocities approaching the speed of light, and demonstrates the necessity of a constant speed of light in all inertial reference frames to maintain adherence to Galileo’s principle of relativity (that the laws of physics are the same in all interior reference frames). Therefore this experiment is, in a sense, “evidence” for Einstein’s second postulate (or rather it shows that if we take his first postulate to be true, the second postulate inevitably follows).


⭐Derivation of time dilation from Einstein's postulates (photon clock) (1905)


Note: This derivation alongside the following two are purely to understand where the HSC equations come from. You will never be asked to derive such equations in the HSC exam. For any confusion on special relativity I highly recommend the series of videos on the topic by https://www.youtube.com/@Mahesh_Shenoy, he does a great job at intuitively explaining them in a digestible way. 


  

Consider the scenario above: Two observers witness the same two events: a “beginning event” of a photon being emitted from a light source, and subsequently after travelling a length “D” to a mirror and back (perpendicular to the direction of relative motion), and an “ending event”, where this photon is received by some receiver. Let out first observer (pictured in “a”) be an astronaut moving at a constant velocity  with respect to our second observer on Earth. Let the time interval between the two events as measured by the astronaut be  and the time interval between the same two events as measured by the observer on Earth by . As such, invoking Einstein's postulate that the speed of light will always be  no matter the inertial observer that measures it (refer to the diagrams):


The astronaut sees the light travel a distance  in the time interval , hence:


The Observer on Earth sees the light travel a distance  in the time interval , hence:


The observer on Earth sees the “photon clock” travel a distance of  in the time interval , hence:




Consider figure (b) from above, we can use that figure to construct a triangle as shown below, and further use pythagoras's theorem to attain the equation:
  


Subbing in our equations from before:

Rearranging:





        


This can be also expressed as , where gamma is the “Lorentz factor”, named after Hendrick Lorentz and is given as , and can be quite handy in saving time writing.


⭐Derivation of length contraction from Einstein's postulates (muon hypothetical) (1905)


The use of a muon in this specific derivation is entirely arbitrary. This section is not to be confused with “Evidence for time dilation and length contraction: High altitude muons”. I took the image from a website, the numerical labels for the lengths are also meaningless.
  

Let  denote the “rest length” between the two clouds, measured from the inertial reference frame of the observer in (a). Let  denote the time interval taken for our muonIn this frame, the velocity of the muon can therefore be given as:





Now let's consider the same situation but from the inertial reference frame of the moving muon. Let's simply call the length that the “two clouds travel” (aka the distance between the two clouds in this frame) . We will let the time interval between the second cloud reaching the muon in this frame be . As such:





The two velocities  will be equal in magnitude, as  is just the difference between the two reference frames. Hence:





Consider the muon’s frame. From our earlier derivation of time dilation, we know that the clock of the observer at rest in frame (a) will tick slower, or be “dilated”:





Where  (the Lorentz factor). Hence:


Which can also be expressed as:



⭐Evidence for relativity of simultaneity: The lights in a box thought experiment
  

Consider the scenario pictured above. Observer A is situated in a box with two lamps across from each other, such that both lamps are equidistant and collinear with respect to observer A. This box whole box is in motion with a constant velocity parallel to the line which the two lamps and the observer lay on, with respect to a secondary observer whom we shall call observer B. Upon turning on the lamps, in the reference frame of observer A, as both “pulses of light” travel the same distance, and we know the speed of light to be constant, any observer will state that in this frame the light from both lamps reaches observer A at the same time. However, from observer B’s frame of reference, the two “pulses of light” will both travel at the same velocity but travel different distances. This is because during the time that the light is travelling, observer A will move some distance towards one of the lamps (in this case towards the lamp on the right), and therefore the light from that lamp will have to travel less distance, whereas the light from the other lamp will have to travel further. As , two different distances travelled will result in the light from the two lamps not reaching the observer simultaneously in this frame of reference, despite the fact that they did in the frame of observer A. This elucidates the consequence of special relativity that two events that are simultaneous in one inertial reference frame need not be simultaneous in another. This concept is important for resolving apparent paradoxes in special relativity, most notably the infamous “twins paradox”.


⭐⭐⭐Evidence for time dilation and length contraction: High altitude muons (Frisch-Smith experiment) (1962)


Similar experiments to this were first conducted in the 1940s.  I am using this particular experiment because it was the most accurate at its time and the most well-documented. Here is the (original) documentary I used for my notes on this experiment: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5wH2UbjGKlw. Note that in the documentary “muons” are repeatedly referred to as “mu mesons”, as presumably due to their high mass (as they are second generation particles) they were incorrectly thought to be a meson. https://goldphysics.unm.edu/phys330/frisch-time-dilation.pdf 


Method:
  

When “cosmic rays” (which are over 99% composed of protons and alpha particles) hit atomic nuclei (primarily those of oxygen and nitrogen) at the top of the earth’s atmosphere, it results in the production of all three types of pions (). The mechanism of this is essentially (I sort of guessed this and a top tutoring college head said “yeah that’s pretty much how it works”) that the high energy collision “excites” the quarks in the nucleus to the point where they have so much energy that they produce a quark-antiquark pair (similar to mediation of the SNF). The  pions are called neutral pions and have an extremely short half life of 85 attoseconds (), and will quickly decay into (in order from most->least likely) either two gamma photons, a gamma photon and a positron-electron pair, or two positron-electron pairs. The charged pions  however will most often undergo a decay that is much more interesting to us, the decay into a muon and a muon neutrino, which is due to the weak interaction. Take the decay of a negative pion into a muon and a muon antineutrino:





The  meson has a mass of approximately , whereas the muon and muon neutrino pair have a combined mass of approximately . Hence, due to the law of conservation of energy, we can assume that the muon will have quite a bit of kinetic energy. But we only considered the rest energy of the  meson, in reality this meson will have a lot of its own kinetic energy, which will also be conserved in this interaction. This results in extremely fast, high energy muons, moving at mean velocities of  to  , where   (just allows us to express velocity in terms of the speed of light without repeating “” over and over).


But remember, muons themselves are second generation leptons, and hence tend to decay over time. This decay most often involves the production of an electron (first generation lepton), an anti-electron neutrino, and a muon neutrino, as such:





This decay has a consistent rest mean lifetime of around 2.2 microseconds (), and hence these muons essentially behave as extremely fast moving clocks, so it’s pretty clear why they are so useful for experiments involving special relativity.
  

Note that “mean life” is a little different to “half life”. Half life is essentially “median life”, and for an exponential decay relationship we can derive the relationship between the mean life  and the half life  to be  (I will omit this derivation), and so therefore we can express the decay constant as , rather than , which is what we will be doing for the remainder of this section (because that’s what the researchers did).


Frisch and Smith aimed to use this property of muons to validate Einstein's theory of time dilation. The first site of the experiment was on Mount Washington, which is 1907m above sea level (sea level was their second site). At Mount Washington, (as mentioned before), they measured the kinetic energy of the muons and calculated the mean muon velocity to range from  to  . They measured approximately 563 muon decays per hour at the top of Mount Washington. 


They then moved down to just above sea level (). Approximating the velocity of the muons to , the time taken for the muons to travel from the height of Mount Washington to the new height should be approximately equal to . If we assume that special relativity has no effect, we can use the decay formula , where Lambda is the decay constant  (where  is our mean lifetime, mean lifetime as stated earlier is essentially a different way of expressing the decay constant, it’s out of syllabus so don’t worry). Using our decay constant  alongside the estimated travel time  given  muons decay per hour at the higher altitude yields a non-relativistic prediction of:




 (Some other figures give 27, not sure why, probably something more complex going on)


So we have a non-relativistic expected value of 31 muon decays per hour at the lower (almost) sea level site. However, in their actual observations they detected approximately 409 decays per hour. This was then compared to the predictions of Einstein's theory of relativity. The time dilation factor  for the Muons travelling at the height of Mount Washington ( to  ) is approximately 10.2. However, between Mount Washington and sea level kinetic energy is dispersed due to interactions with the atmosphere (loss of KE through collisions), and for this reason the kinetic energy of the muons was again measured at sea level. Based on these sea level measurements, new sea level velocities ranging from  to   were calculated, which yields a Lorentz factor of approximately . Hence, the average Lorentz factor over the trip was expected to be around . 


Now we check if Einstein's prediction aligns with our observations. Since , where  is the time the muons experience and  is the lab time, we can rearrange our expression from earlier, this time using the time  as “measured by the muons” and substitute in our values:



 

Sub in for the decay constant:

Sub in  for :






Which confirms Einstein's predictions (as the average Lorentz factor over the trip was expected to be around , a value of  is pretty close, in the actual paper the researchers made some fancy arguments that based on their methods their true results were actually closer). 


We analysed this situation from the “lab” frame and found evidence for time dilation, but similarly, we can analyse this situation from the “muon” frame. From this frame, we can account for these observations via length contraction. 


Instead of travelling a distance of , the muons “see” this length contracted by the Lorentz factor, as such:
,         
Hence:

And we arrive at the same relationship that we got from analysing time dilation in the other frame.


Conclusion:


Therefore, this experiment provides evidence for both length contraction and time dilation, as either can account for the observations. In the “lab” frame, the muons are able to “go further” on average before decaying because we see “their clocks run slower”. In the muon’s frame, they see their “clocks” run at the rest speed, however they see the distance they travel contract, meaning that more can still travel the  interval before decaying. 


⭐⭐⭐Evidence for time dilation: Hafele-Keating Experiment (1971)


Note: The muon experiment I would say is superior evidence for special relativity, I would always use it over this one if given the choice.


Context:


When Einstein formulated special relativity in 1905, it seemed to go against all human intuition. This is of course because in our day-to-day lives, we do not experience velocities fast enough or have methods of gauging time or length accurately enough to notice any of the effects of special relativity. While by the 1970s, the analysis of muons alongside other methods had provided a significant amount of evidence for special relativity, nobody had ever actually seen or measured an actual “moving clock running slower” so to speak. However, with the invention of commercial aeroplanes which are able to sustain “relatively high” velocities for long periods of time, and more importantly, the development of extremely precise atomic clocks, this was about to change. Hafele was an assistant professor preparing notes for a physics lecture when he did a back-of-the-envelope calculation which determined that a caesium atomic clock alongside commercial airlines should at last have sufficient precision to detect relativistic effects. He was approached by Keating, an astronomer at the United States Naval Observatory, who worked with and had access to atomic clocks, and together they attained funding of $8,000 for this experiment, making it the most inexpensive experiment on special/general relativity ever at that point (of this $8000, $7600 was spent on the eight round the world plane tickets).
  



Method:


The Hafele-Keating experiment was formulated to provide “tangible” evidence for time dilation as described in Einstein's theory of relativity (both special relativity and general relativity). 


Two around-the-world trips were made, each with (the same) four atomic clocks. After each trip, the four clocks were reunited with and compared with a “stationary” clock at the United States Naval Observatory. Two flights were performed, one eastward (in the direction of the Earth’s rotation) and then another westward (against the Earth’s rotation). 


Hafele and Keating predicted that there would be two relativistic effects impacting the time on the moving clocks. Firstly, but less importantly, the effects of general relativity should cause both clocks to “gain some time”, or aka “run faster” than the clock on Earth’s surface, as they will have a greater gravitational potential. Since in the HSC, we don’t deal with general relativity, apart from knowing that it was also examined in this experiment we will be largely ignoring it. Secondly, and more importantly, both clocks will have different relative velocities compared to the clock on the ground, and hence we expect a time difference between the two clocks that travelled in the planes and the clock that remained on the ground when they are eventually reunited. Let's analyse this situation from the closest thing to an inertial reference frame we can get to in this situation, the frame of the centre of the Earth. In this frame, we see the clock on the ground travelling with some velocity due to the rotation of the Earth, and hence it will “run slower” to an extent. In this frame, the plane travelling east will have the plane’s velocity added to the velocity of the rotation of the Earth, and hence we expect this clock to “run even slower” than the clock on the ground, resulting in it reading less time when the clocks are reunited. In this frame, the westward clock will have the plane’s velocity subtracted from the velocity of the rotation of the earth, as it is heading in the opposite direction, and hence, while the clock on this plane will still experience time dilation, it will be less than the clock on the Earth’s surface due to a lower average velocity in this frame, and therefore we expect that this clock will “run faster” and as a result read a greater time than the ground clock when we reunite them. 


Hafele and Keating made the following quantitative predictions based on calculations using special and general relativity (I will omit the general relativity part):
  

Clearly, the results aligned with the predictions of special relativity to a very acceptable extent given the method, providing significant evidence for time dilation. This experiment is not the best evidence out there, but it’s quite famous and historically significant as it was the first time that we could actually physically see that a real clock had “ran slower” in a sense, so it became quite publicly known.


Module 8 - Atomic and subatomic


⭐Discovery of the electron: Behaviour of cathode rays (in general)


A brief context on cathode rays:


Cathode rays are produced through a process that begins with thermionic emission, where a cathode, typically made of metal, is heated to high temperatures (usually between 600 and 2000 degrees Celsius), causing electrons to gain enough thermal energy to escape from the cathode's surface. Once these electrons are emitted, a high voltage is applied between the cathode and an anode located within the same tube, creating an electric field that accelerates the emitted electrons toward the positively charged anode. In our case, this high voltage is provided by an induction coil, which is basically just a form of a transformer, consisting of a primary coil with a comparatively low number of windings interposed within a secondary coil with up to 10,000 times more windings. Current in the primary coil is rapidly switched on and off by an interrupter mechanism to create a changing magnetic field and hence induce a high voltage in the secondary coil. The AC voltage produced by this inductor coil is then rectified into a steady DC voltage.
  
 
This voltage is applied between two plates, creating a negatively charged cathode and a positively charged anode. The cathode is then heated to sufficient temperatures such that electrons have energy > the work function of the metal and can thus be thermionically emitted. 
  

Consider a thermionically emitted electron exiting the cathode:


From the electric component of the Lorentz force:

We know , thus:

From Newton’s second law:




Hence the large potential difference between the anode and the cathode will accelerate the electrons to quite high velocities and kinetic energies (as both the q/m and V/d ratio are very large). Typically in an atmospheric environment, collisions with incident gas molecules would dissipate a large fraction of this kinetic energy, however, Heinrich Geissler’s development of the vacuum pump allowed for the region in between the cathode and the anode to be evacuated of up to 0.01% of normal atmospheric pressure, hence minimising the kinetic energy loss of the electrons and allowing the area to “conduct” electricity and the cathode rays to properly form. These “cathode rays” were named as such because they were quite literally rays that originated from the cathode.


Below are the appearances of cathode rays as we change the air pressure in the discharge tube (will mostly be explained, but there are a lot of interesting cathode ray phenomena that I’ll be skipping over because I can’t see them being useful for the HSC at all):
  



Cathode ray phenomena:


Charge of cathode rays:


Cathode rays were observed to be deflected by a magnetic field (and electric fields, but not by all historical accounts, see the next section). The direction of deflection was consistent with that of a negative charge and extent of deflection was dependent on the magnitude of the applied field. Hence, whatever cathode rays are composed of, it must be negatively charged.
  

Why do they glow?


The “glow” in cathode rays is a result of the interaction between the cathode rays and the remnant gas molecules (even though the environment is relatively low pressure). The high voltage across the cathode and the anode allows for the electrons to be accelerated to rather high velocities. The kinetic energy of the electrons eventually reaches a point where collisions with incident gas molecules are enough to ionise them or “excite” their electrons to higher energy levels (depending on the KE of the cathode ray), which converts the kinetic energy of the electrons in the cathode ray (obviously they didn’t know the cathode rays were electrons just yet) to electric potential energy, overcoming the negative binding energy between the electron and the nucleus (scientists of course were not aware of any of this at the time). The ionised electrons are eventually recaptured by the nucleus, where they will regain their negative binding energy (falling into a lower energy state) and hence emit photons in accordance with the law of conservation of energy. The “excited” electrons simply fall straight back into a lower energy state. If this seems hard to digest, it’s extremely similar to electron transitions in Bohr’s model of the atom (where a photon knocks the electron into a higher energy state and then the electron “falls back down” emitting another photon), the difference being that in our cathode ray case it’s not a the energy being absorbed from a photon that allows for the first energy transition, but rather the kinetic energy from one of the electrons that makes up our cathode ray. If you don’t understand the “negative binding energy/electric potential energy”, electric potential energy between two opposing charged particles is pretty much exactly analogous to gravitational potential energy (just a much much higher magnitude of course).


  





Note:


I spent a decent amount of time researching why these look the way they are and it’s quite complex. I was able to get a decent bit of understanding behind some things, but others you simply need more than HSC/1st year uni intuition to get a proper understanding of why, and unless you actually know why there isn’t really much of a point trying to explain it. To be completely honest this is not going to come up in the HSC, so I’m not going to be including notes explaining all the phenomena (I tried trust me). If you just know the reason for the glow and the rough idea you should be fine. 


⭐⭐Discovery of the electron:  The British against German examination of cathode rays (1897)


The wave or particle debate:


There was some debate between the British (most notably Thomson) and German (most notably Hertz) when it came to the nature of cathode rays. The Germans believed that the cathode rays were waves, whereas the British were proponents of the particle model of cathode rays. 


Evidence supporting the wave theory (note that some of these observations are not “true” of cathode rays):


      * The cathode rays could penetrate a thin aluminium plate, it was thought that if cathode rays were waves similar to light, they may be able to pass through certain materials.
      * Hertz was unable to experimentally deflect the cathode rays with an electric field, which is not what you would expect from a charged particle.
      * Moving charges were known to induce a magnetic field (Ampere’s law), which could influence nearby compass needles, and Hertz did not observe such deflection


Notable evidence supporting the particle theory:


      * While Hertz was unable to deflect the cathode rays with electric fields, Thomson was able to deflect them with magnetic fields with ease. The direction of deflection alongside the fact that the extent of deflection would increase proportionally with the applied field strength indicated that cathode rays had a negative charge, which is a property of particles rather than waves.
  

      * Further experiments with electric fields allowed Thomson to observe deflection of cathode rays. The reason that electric fields were unable to deflect the cathode rays visibly before is likely due to two main factors. Firstly, if a weak external electric field was applied, it would not meaningfully accelerate the charges (as the charges would have a much larger magnitude of acceleration perpendicular to the external electric field due to the high potential difference). Secondly, if the electric field strength was sufficiently high to theoretically cause an observable deflection, it would result in a phenomenon known as “shielding”. Such a strong electric field would ionise/attract gaseous ions to either side of the tube, so for instance, the side of the tube with the negative external plate (which is meant to be “repelling” the negative cathode rays may attract positive gas ions, which will build up and “pull back” the electrons to an extent, minimising the magnitude of overall deflection. It is likely that the deflection of magnetic fields in any case was also more noticeable than electric fields because it’s magnitude  is proportional to the velocity, and hence the high velocities of the cathode rays act as a “multiplier” on the force so to speak.
         * If an opaque object was placed in the path, a sharp shadow would appear (often a maltese cross is used to demonstrate this, seen below).
  

         * When a small paddle wheel was placed in the path of the cathode ray, it moved, or gained momentum. Due to the law of conservation of momentum, it was concluded that the cathode rays had momentum and therefore had to have mass, which would be the property of a particle and not a wave. However, it would later be discovered that while the cathode rays do indeed have momentum, the true explanation for this experimental result is a thermodynamic one (the paddle wheel was essentially acting as a form of heat engine).
  



Conclusion:


Hence, Thomson concluded that electrons were particles. The consequences of this will be continued at the end of the next experiment.


⭐⭐⭐Discovery of the electron: J.J. Thomson’s calculation of the charge to mass ratio of cathode rays (1897)


This is going to be a really quick and straightforward section, as the method was very simple and we have already discussed cathode rays to a decent extent before. Consider the Lorentz force, . We can see that the electric component of the Lorentz force  will operate parallel to the electric field. However, the magnetic component  involving the cross product of velocity will operate perpendicular to the magnetic field (and velocity). Hence, we can establish an electric field perpendicular to a magnetic field, where both fields are perpendicular to the velocity of the cathode rays, and we can have the electric and magnetic components acting along the same axis. We can then setup the electric and magnetic field such that they “oppose” each other so to speak, and furthermore (ignoring gravity, as the magnitude of  is negligible) tweak the magnitude of the magnetic and electric fields such that no net deflection is observed. We can then use the knowledge that at this point  (no acceleration) to determine an expression for the velocity of the electron:






Hence, knowing the external applied electric and magnetic field strengths, Thomson could determine the charge to mass ratio of the cathode rays.


Once this velocity was determined, either the electric OR the magnetic field could be removed and the q/m ratio determined. First, consider removing the electric field, leaving only the magnetic field (as mentioned earlier, it is much easier to observe and measure magnetic deflection, so this is the historically preferred and more practical method):


The “cathode ray” will then undergo uniform circular motion, with the centripetal force being the magnetic component of the Lorentz force, hence:






In terms of the original electric and magnetic field (equilibrium) measurements, assuming we kept the magnetic field the same magnitude:





Similarly, if we instead remove the magnetic field and keep the electric field (this is something that was not done historically but could maybe come up in questions), there are methods to calculate the q/m ratio of the electron using the principles of projectile motion. Such methods are not conventional, but it is possible to construct some pretty interesting questions with them (if you see my “diabolical physics question document” I wrote one there).


Hence Thomson was able to calculate the charge to mass ratio of the particles that made up cathode rays, and the value he attained was . This value was quite significant in the development of atomic theory, as it was so so much higher than the largest q/m ratios observed at the time (nuclei with the highest q/m ratio is the proton, which has the same charge and a mass 4 orders of magnitude larger, but these q/m ratios hadn’t even been measured then, so in reality this q/m ratio was likely tens of thousands of times larger than what had ever been observed). This meant one of two things: Either a ridiculously high charge, or a ridiculously low mass. Thomson ruled out the idea of a ridiculously high charge, as the lack of effect of cathode rays on a nearby magnetic compass needle forbids this (as a greater charge magnitude = greater  = greater Amperian magnetic field production). Hence the particles that make up cathode rays must have a mass, and a mass lower than observed ever before. Moreover, these particles could be emitted from a wide range of materials. This meant that Dalton’s model of the atom needed to be completely overturned, as the whole idea behind it relied on indivisible, relatively large (at least compared to the speculated mass of the particles that made up cathode rays), relatively neutral fundamental building blocks of matter. The discovery of this new particle, termed the “electron”, indicated that there was more to the atom, beyond Dalton’s model, inspiring Thomson’s “plum pudding” model of the atom (see mod 8 notes).


⭐⭐⭐The charge of an electron: Robert Millikan’s “oil drop” experiment (1909)


Context:

As we know, at the beginning of the 20th century, the existence of the electron was established by J.J. Thomson through his work with cathode rays, and he was able to successfully measure the charge-to-mass ratio of the electron. However, the exact charge of a single electron remained unknown. Hence, the primary aim of Millikan’s oil drop experiment was to measure this “elementary charge unit” “𝑒” of a single electron, which would in the process confirm the idea that charge is quantised, where electrons are the “discrete packets”.


Method:
  
  



“Atomised” tiny oil droplets were sprayed into a chamber with a metal plate above and below. Initially the plates were turned off and the oil droplets were allowed to free-fall. According to Stokes law (outside syllabus, but it’s good to know he used it), the drag force acting on the droplet is proportional to velocity. Hence, as gravity accelerates the droplets down, the drag force will increase over time due to the constantly increasing velocity until an equilibrium is established where , and no more acceleration is occurring. This velocity is known as the terminal velocity, and it was measured by Millikan to attain the mass of the specific droplets he experimented on (he had to individually measure the mass of each droplet that he performed the experiment on as they were not all of the same mass of course). Stokes law is given as follows:





Where  is the terminal velocity,  is the viscosity of the air, and  is the radius of the drop. Equating this to  (which will be true at terminal velocity, let us call this ):








This is the “HSC way” of finding the mass of the droplet, however with such fine droplets we need to also account for the “upthrust” due to the displaced air of the droplet, which makes the calculations a little more complex, but we ignore this part. 


Since Millikan was able to measure the viscosity of the air prior to the experiment, and measure the radius and the terminal velocity of a specific droplet during the experiment, he could hence calculate the mass for that given droplet as such.


The next step was finding the charge on that droplet, which Millikan did by ionising the oil drops through exposure to high energy X-rays, resulting in them losing some electrons, which, as the oil drops were originally neutral, would leave them with new a positive charge with a magnitude identical to the magnitude of charge of the lost electrons. He then established a high voltage across two plates, a positive plate below the space of the oil drops and a negative plate above. One way to find the charge (and the way that is often “taught” so I would probably write this in an exam if it came up) is to tweak this voltage until his given droplet remained stationary (so not only would this involve balancing out the vertical forces such that it was non-accelerating, but also making it actually stationary so there would be no need to account for air resistance when equating the vertical forces). At this point:









However, a more practical approach is to turn the voltage up slightly such that the oil drop rises with a new terminal velocity , however this way is not the way we use in the HSC because to do it properly you need to also calculate the mass/drag force properly in the first step, and it again just makes things more complicated and the point of these experiments is mainly to understand their significance rather than the intricacies behind how they worked, at least in this course.


So therefore, Millikan knew the mass of each oil drop he experimented on and knew the distance and voltage applied between the two plates, and hence he was able to deduce the charge of oil droplets this way. However, he had not yet measured the “elementary charge unit” that he seeked, as all of these oil droplets had lost many electrons, not just one or any specific known number. 


However, after performing many measurements of the charge of many different oil drops, Millikan was able to observe that their charge always came in integer multiples of . This meant that charge was in fact quantised, and that  was the “elementary” or “smallest portion” of charge that could be transferred. Hence, this must be the charge on one single electron. This value of charge was then able to be used alongside the previously known  ratio of the electron to find the mass of an electron. Further development and experiments in this area would support these results and fine-tune our measurement for the charge on an electron to  over the next decades.
  



⭐⭐⭐Discovery of the nucleus: Geiger-Marsden “gold foil” experiment (1909)


Context:


Prior alpha particle scattering experiments had been performed by Rutherford in 1906 and Geiger 1908. Let's consider Geiger’s 1908 paper on such experiments, in which he described the following:
  

(Simplified) A radiation source (R) acts as a source of alpha particles. In the middle of the tube there was a thin slit. The opposite end of the tube (Z) is covered with a phosphorescent screen, such that any incident alpha particles will produce small scintillations on the screen corresponding to the location of impact. A microscope (M) was used to count these scintillations and measure their spread. Geiger pumped all of the air out of the tube and noticed that the alpha particles travelled straight through the slight and onto the screen, as expected, however when he interposed one or more thin gold foils (NOTE THIS IS NOT THE ACTUAL “GOLD FOIL EXPERIMENT” YET, JUST A LITTLE CONTEXT), the pattern became more diffuse, suggesting that matter may have the ability to scatter alpha particles. Rutherford himself understood the consequences of this, quoting after his 1906 experiment "such a result brings out clearly the fact that the atoms of matter must be the seat of very intense electrical forces". This section delves into the 1909 experiment, as that is the important one for the HSC, but it was only one (albeit the most significant) of many Rutherford scattering experiments that occurred mainly from 1906-1913.


The 1909 (important) experiment:


The initial results on alpha particle scattering were confusing enough to prompt Rutherford to suggest to a young student, Ernest Marsden, who was studying under Hans Geiger at the time, to search for reflected or back scattered particles. They developed the following apparatus, somewhat similar to that used by Geiger in 1908:
  

Thomson’s model predicted that the alpha particles should pass straight through the gold foil, as due to the relatively uniform and even distribution of negative and positive charge throughout the plum pudding model of the atom, any electrostatic repulsion between the positive alpha particles and the nuclei should be negligible. What the results showed however conflicted with this prediction, as while it was true that the most alpha particles passed straight through, Thomson's model could not account for the approximately 1/8000 particles that experienced diffuse reflections (a significant and varying deflection angle).
  

This prompted the formulation of a new model that could account for this observation, Rutherford’s model. This model consisted of a small, positively charged nucleus that contained all of the positive charge of the atom, surrounded by electrons orbiting this nucleus similarly to how planets orbit the sun in the solar system. Similarly to Thomson’s model, this was able to account for the majority of alpha particles passing straight through, as the vast majority of this atom was empty space. Improving on Thomson’s model, it was also able to account for the occasional reflection. Such reflections would require a very large acceleration, and hence a relatively large force . This force of course is accounted for by Coulomb’s electrostatic repulsion between the nucleus and the alpha particle, . As the nucleus proposed in Rutherford’s model is much smaller than the Thomson atom, the alpha particles can come much closer (without penetrating the nucleus), hence experiencing a much smaller radius. This alongside the fact that the charge of the nucleus is of a significantly greater magnitude than the “evenly spread out pudding” in Thomson's model was able to mathematically allow the deflections that Thomson’s model could not account for. Hence, Rutherford’s model of the atom was born.


⭐⭐⭐Evidence for De Broglie matter waves: Davisson-Germer experiment (1927) (To do before HSC)


This one isn’t really done bcs the real method is kinda confusing. Just know the principle and it should be chill (similar to Young’s double slit certain conditions result in regions of constructive and destructive interference with an angular dependence, illustrated the properties of diffraction + interference (wave properties) and measurements of the wavelength verified the De Broglie hypothesis ).


Context:

The Davisson-Germer experiment was not originally meant to provide evidence for the wave-particle duality of matter, but rather to simply “study the surface of a piece of nickel” by directing a beam of electrons at it and observing how the electrons “bounce off” at various angles.


The experiment:
  

Diffraction pattern:




  



Bragg diffraction:
  





When the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, Bragg's condition for full constructive interference: 


For generally predicting full constructive interference:

Where  and  are the angles of incidence and reflection respectively (for when they aren’t equal, which is in most cases because there is only one angle of incidence but the matter wave fully constructively interferes at a number of angles).


This experiment demonstrates the wave-particle duality of matter itself, as diffraction and interference are fundamentally wave properties (similar to Young’s double slit). By knowing “” and measuring the angles of incidence and reflection where full constructive interference occurs, the wavelength of the electrons could be calculated. When compared to the predictions of the De Broglie hypothesis, the relationship  was validated.


This one kinda isn’t fully done (same with the next one)


⭐Evidence for De Broglie matter waves: G. P. Thomson’s experiment (1927)


Just going to do this one briefly, if you have to use one experiment for De Broglie matter waves just use Davisson and Germer. Only use this one as well if there is like a 7-9 marker on wave particle duality and it’s evidence or smth (I’m killing myself if that’s the 9 marker btw).


  

Basically G. P. Thomson got an electron beam in a vacuum (very very very close to a vacuum) and passed it through a very thin sheet of gold foil. They then diffract and interfere creating a pattern of concentric uniform rings around a central min/max. This experiment had been performed before with X-rays, and similar results were observed. Obviously this illustrates the “wave-like” properties of diffraction and interference, further elucidating matter’s wave-like nature (as predicted by De Broglie). Unlike the Davisson-Germer experiment, I do not believe that they calculated the actual wavelength and momentum of the electrons, so this is only evidence for the wave-like nature, not for the De Broglie relationship  itself.


⭐⭐Wilson cloud chambers


Context:


Wilson cloud chambers consist of a supersaturated vapour (made possible by low temperatures) of water or alcohol (must be highly polar). When any energetic charged particle, such as an alpha or beta particle for instance, passes through this chamber, it will naturally transfer its energy to the vapour molecules it collides with, providing sufficient energy to ionise them. This results in a trail of positive ions tracing out the path the charged particle took. The polar supersaturated vapour will be attracted to this charged trail, resulting in condensation around the trail, making the path the energetic particle took visible to the naked eye in proper lighting conditions. C. T. R. Wilson was awarded the nobel prize in physics in 1927 for the development of the Wilson cloud chamber.
   
  



Contribution of Wilson cloud chambers to physical theory:


Early evidence of muons:


Muons produced by cosmic rays (see Frisch-Smith experiment context) are essentially “heavy electrons” so to speak (second generation), hence they are able to ionise the vapour in Wilson cloud chambers and produce trails comparable to those of high energy electrons. Scientists subjected the Wilson cloud chambers to magnetic fields in and measured the radius and were able to note events that appeared to have a negative q/m ratio that had a different magnitude to that of electrons, protons and alpha particles (although how they found the velocity to compute the q/m ratio the “classic” way I am uncertain of).


Insight into the nature of radiation:
  



Alpha particle tracks:
         * High thickness/prominence. Due to their high mass and charge, alpha radiation is generally the strongest ioniser. With stronger ionisation comes a more prominent trail.
         * The path is straight for the most part, as the high mass means the forces from incident particle collisions have less of an effect () on the path.
         * As the alpha particles lose kinetic energy relatively quickly (as each collision is quite high energy), the paths are typically on the shorter side.
         * Alpha particle paths are typically continuous.


Beta particle tracks:
            * Thinner than those of alpha particles, as beta particles typically have less energy than alpha particles and ionise less particles per unit length travelled (due to their smaller size), resulting in a less prominent trail.
            * The path is usually “wonky” for beta particles, as the lower mass means that incident particle collisions have a notable effect on the beta particle’s trajectory.
            * Beta particles lose kinetic energy significantly slower than alpha particles, as due to their smaller size collisions are more infrequent and less energy is lost per collision.
            * Beta particle paths are typically continuous.


Gamma radiation tracks:
            * The gamma radiation itself does not produce tracks in a Wilson cloud chamber, however gamma ray interactions can result in low energy beta particles, either from the gamma radiation being absorbed by an electron, “freeing” the electron and ionising it, or more occasionally, by spontaneous pair production of an electron and a positron.
            * Hence, the ”gamma radiation tracks” appear as many low energy beta particle tracks.


⭐⭐⭐James Chadwick’s discovery of the neutron (1932)


Context:


Recall where we left off the nucleus, with Rutherford's model, which essentially described the nucleus as a relatively small (compared to the size of the overall atom) positive charge, the composition of which was unknown. In 1911, it was proposed by Antonius van de Broek that the place of each element in the periodic table was dependent on its nuclear charge, an assertion that would be proved two years later by Henry Mosely in 1913, using X-ray spectroscopy. In 1917, Rutherford performed experiments which proved that the hydrogen nucleus is present in other nuclei (specific knowledge of such procedures I don’t think would be needed for the HSC). Furthermore, it was noted that atomic masses were (approximately) integer multiples of the mass of the hydrogen atom, however the charge of the nucleus (known as the atomic number) was too low for the nucleus to be composed only of these “proton” building blocks, as we would expect the nucleus of every element to have the same q/m ratio as hydrogen in that scenario, which is not the case. The prevailing theory was that the nucleus was composed of a mix of protons and electrons, where the cancellation of the electron’s positive charge accounted for the q/m ratios of nuclei (basically in this model, for every place we would have a “neutron” today there was a proton-electron pair, an “alpha particle” would have consisted of four protons and two electrons). 


It’s important to note that there were several problems with the nuclear electrons hypothesis at the time (and many more that would be discovered later with the further development of quantum theory. Consider a nitrogen-14 nucleus. The nuclear electron model would predict that this would be composed of 14 neutrons and 7 electrons, an odd number of odd spin particles, and hence the nucleus itself must have a half integer spin. This was conflicted by a 1928 analysis of Nitrogen’s nuclear spin, and it was suggested that perhaps "protons and electrons do not retain their identity to the extent they do outside the nucleus". In 1928 through further development of quantum mechanics, namely quantum tunnelling, it was predicted that an electron could not be confined within the atomic nucleus by any potential well (don’t worry too much about any specifics with quantum mechanics like this; it's fine to rote learn). By 1930, further evidence against this hypothesis was devised based on Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, the relationship  suggested that due to the low uncertainty in position of the electron (small ),  must be larger, and hence the electron must have a notably high amount of energy. Specifically, the model implied that a given electron in the nucleus must have (in the ballpark of)  of energy. Such energy is significantly larger than the observed energy of beta particles emitted from the nucleus and much larger than the binding energy of the other nucleons, which had been shown to be less than  per nucleon.


In 1930 it was discovered that energetic alpha particles emitted from polonium were able to produce an unknown, highly penetrating radiation when they fell on certain light elements (most notably Beryllium). Most radiation that had been previously observed (alpha and beta) was charged, but this radiation experienced no deflection when passing through an electric field. One theory at the time was that this was a form of gamma radiation, however it was significantly more penetrating than gamma radiation was known to be. Two years later it was observed that this radiation could eject high energy protons, up to around  of kinetic energy, when it fell on paraffin wax or any other hydrogen containing compound. For a gamma ray to produce such effects, it would have to have an impossibly high energy, and hence it was speculated that this new radiation had to be a neutral particle around the size of a proton.


James Chadwick also did not believe the “gamma ray” hypothesis, and set out to show experimentally that the gamma ray hypothesis was false, and to find the true identity of this radiation.


Method:




  



Chadwick used a setup similar to that depicted above (and described in the context) and made the following observations:


            * The number of detected particles was significantly higher than if the neutral radiation were gamma rays, as gamma rays have a high level of penetration and therefore interact less with the material.
            * The emitted radiation could not cause the photoelectric effect, which would be expected of high energy gamma rays.
            * Ejected protons were detected to have a kinetic energy of . It was calculated using the law of conservation of momentum that a gamma ray would need to have approximately  of energy to allow for this, which is much greater than the energy of any gamma ray that could come from the nucleus.
            * He was able to determine that the mass of this particle was almost exactly the same as that of a proton. 



Hence, Chadwick proposed that this radiation was Rutherford’s “Neutron”, and was awarded the nobel prize in physics in 1935 for this discovery.


⭐⭐Evidence that protons and neutrons are not fundamental: Alvarez and Bloch (1940)


In 1940, physicists Luis Alvarez and Felix Bloch conducted an experiment to measure the magnetic moment of the neutron using a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique. In this experiment, neutrons were placed in a magnetic field, and radiofrequency waves were applied to cause transitions in their spin states. By observing the frequency at which these transitions occurred, they could calculate the neutron’s magnetic moment (out of syllabus, you can just say “they used NMR techniques to calculate the spin”). Surprisingly, they found that the neutron has a small but nonzero magnetic moment. This result was unexpected because if the neutron were a truly elementary particle without internal structure, it should not have a magnetic moment due to its lack of electric charge. The presence of a magnetic moment suggests that the neutron has an internal structure, with electrically charged components arranged in a way that produces a net magnetic moment (despite the neutron being electrically neutral). This discovery was a significant early indication that neutrons (and by extension, protons) are composed of smaller, charged components. This finding would later support the development of the quark model in particle physics. 


⭐⭐⭐Evidence that protons and neutrons are not fundamental: SLAC deep inelastic scattering (1968)


These particle accelerator experiments are pretty complex, so there isn’t too much detail needed for the HSC. A simple way to consider these experiments is that they are to nucleons and quarks what the Geiger-Marsden experiment was to the atom and nucleus. The development of particle accelerators allowed for a series of “deep inelastic scattering” experiments to be performed between 1967 and 1973 at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Centre (SLAC). These experiments essentially consisted of “probing” nucleons by firing and colliding high energy electron beams at protons and neutrons. Similar to the Geiger-Marsden experiment, they observed a scattering pattern that was consistent with what we would expect if protons and neutrons were composed of smaller particles (quarks) (they appeared to scatter from three different points, indicating three quarks). Hence, this experiment is evidence that protons and neutrons are not fundamental, but my best guess would be that you don’t need to know it too deeply.


⭐⭐Standard model prediction of the W and Z bosons, prediction of the Higgs boson


The electroweak theory emerged in the 1970s from the work of Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg. How the theory was formulated is so far beyond the syllabus that I can't be bothered to learn it, you will never need it in an exam. The theory predicted the existence of three massive bosons that mediate the weak force,  and . The existence of these bosons was later confirmed in 1983 after years of experiments at Cern, where the masses of the  bosons were reported at approximately  and the  boson at approximately . These values correlated with those predicted by the standard model. This is all on a level beyond the HSC, but this would allow us to better understand the electroweak unification, which occurs in extremely high energy conditions. Hence, we were able to better understand and predict the particle interactions that would have occurred in the early universe and the phase changes in the timeline after the big bang (the breaking of the electroweak symmetry at a temperature of approximately ). Again, these notes are very thorough but I highly doubt the HSC demands a decent understanding of gauge electroweak theory considering they can’t be bothered to teach motional EMF.


⭐⭐Wilson cloud chambers and the positron 
Context:


In 1928 Paul Dirac published a paper introducing the Dirac equation, which unified quantum mechanics and special relativity and the idea of electron spin to explain the Zeeman effect (“splitting” of electron energy levels upon exposure to an external magnetic field).This equation had a controversial “negative energy” solution, which could not be ignored. This solution was eventually interpreted as “electrons moving backwards in time”, which would have a positive charge. This idea was used to predict the spontaneous pair production and annihilation that we see in particle-antiparticle interactions. The first experimental evidence for this particle came in Wilson cloud chambers, where as early as 1923 particles that behaved like electrons, but curled in the opposite direction under an applied magnetic field were observed and noted. The positron was officially discovered by Carl David Anderson in 1932 (for which he won a nobel prize). Anderson allowed cosmic rays to pass through a Wilson Cloud chamber, which produced particle-antiparticle pairs. Similarly to earlier methods, an external magnetic field was applied across the Wilson cloud chamber, and the particle’s path could be photographed. The radius of the path indicated an identical charge to mass ratio of an electron, but the deflection was in the opposite direction, indicating a positive charge.


⭐⭐Discovery of the neutrino (Cowan-Reines) (1956)


Context:


Consider the law of conservation of energy, every particle interaction must abide by the condition . In alpha decay, the energy of the produced alpha particle is monokinetic, meaning for any given alpha decay, the products will always have the same energy. Initially, beta particles were thought to be similar, after all, since the difference between reactants and products will be the same for any given reaction no matter how many times you perform it, so to abide by the law of conservation of energy, the product must have that same missing  value from their kinetic energy every single time. However, it was later shown that the energy of the beta particle emitted in beta decay was NOT monokinetic. This would violate the law of conservation of energy, and hence there must be some other form of energy emitted in the products that we were not aware of. Pauli proposed that there must be a very small, neutral particle produced in conjunction with the other products. This particle was termed the neutrino. (the neutrino also was needed to conserve momentum and angular momentum).


Method:


You shouldn’t need to know much detail but they basically observed a process called inverse beta decay in a nuclear reactor.





Such a process, an antineutrino (which from the conservation of energy requirements mentioned before was predicted to be necessary in such a reaction) would interact with a proton to form a neutron and a positron. This reaction was able to be detected as the positron would quickly interact with an electron and annihilate, producing two gamma rays, which were detectable.


Module 8 - The universe


⭐⭐⭐Hubble’s observations 
















































Some cathode yap I ended up removing but I want to keep here just in case after the HSC I want to have a better look into them:
We often model the electric field between two oppositely charged plates as uniform (which comes from Gauss’s law for electricity), however in reality (I was trying to explain Crookes dark space here)


Consider an electron that has just been thermionically emitted. Such an electron will have some residual kinetic energy from the thermionic emission, which is quickly dissipated by collisions with incident gas molecules, exciting their electrons to higher energy levels, resulting in a dim glow pretty much immediately off the cathode. Consider any one of these electrons just after the cathode glow, still near the cathode. The electric field at this point would have done minimal work on the electron , and hence the electron’s kinetic energy will be insufficient to excite electrons and certainly insufficient to ionise atoms, and therefore we will not see any glow until the electron has gone far enough along the tube such that enough of its electric potential energy has been converted to kinetic energy. This region near the cathode where electrons are “accelerating up to speed” is known as the “Crookes dark space”. As we increase the pressure in the tube, we notice that the “Crookes dark space” will appear longer if we keep the applied voltage constant. This is because more collisions with incident gas molecules effectively act as a “drag force” on the electron/cathode ray, which increases the distance it takes for the electron to reach a sufficient kinetic energy for the glow to be produced upon interactions with atoms. The official way we say “more collisions” in this context uses the idea of a “mean free path”, which is the average distance that any given electron travels between collisions. The mean free path of course decreases as we increase the pressure, explaining the increase in collisions over any given interval of displacement, accounting for the expansion of the Crookes dark space. Consider the region right after the Crookes Dark space. After some displacement, the electrons will have gained sufficient kinetic energy to start consistently exciting electrons to higher energy levels. This area is known as the “negative glow”, for reasons that should become apparent later, and consists of a constant 


Irrelevant thing


Basically, consider the binding energy of quarks within nucleons due to the strong force. As we know that the strong force is “strong” to put it simply, it will naturally take a lot of energy to overcome this. When such levels of energy are achieved, the quarks and gluons can be “liberated” from the confinement of a nucleon (gross oversimplification but it should do), resulting in the formation of a quark-gluon plasma. Such conditions were present in the very early universe, but they can also be recreated in particle accelerators today.